Debian Plugin
=============

The debian package specification is very robust and powerful.  If you wish to do any advanced features, it's best to understand how
the underlying packaging system works.  http://tldp.org/HOWTO/html_single/Debian-Binary-Package-Building-HOWTO/ is an excellent tutorial.

SBT Native Packager provides two ways to build debian packages. A native one, where you need ``dpkg-deb`` installed
or a java, platform independent approach with `jdeb <https://github.com/tcurdt/jdeb>`_. By default the *native* implementation
is activated.

.. contents:: 
  :depth: 2
  
  
.. raw:: html

  <div class="alert alert-info" role="alert">
    <span class="glyphicon glyphicon-info-sign" aria-hidden="true"></span>
    The debian plugin dependens on the linux plugin. For general linux settings read the 
    <a href="linux.html">Linux Plugin Documentation</a>
  </div>

Requirements
------------

If you use the *native*  debian package implementation you need the following applications installed:

* dpkg-deb
* dpkg-sig
* dpkg-genchanges
* lintian
* fakeroot

Build
-----

.. code-block:: bash

  sbt debian:packageBin

Required Settings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A debian package needs some mandatory settings to be valid. Make sure
you have these settings in your build:

.. code-block:: scala

    name := "Debian Example"

    version := "1.0"

    maintainer := "Max Smith <max.smith@yourcompany.io>"

    packageSummary := "Hello World Debian Package"

    packageDescription := """A fun package description of our software,
      with multiple lines."""

1.0 or higher
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Enable the debian plugin to activate the native package implementation.

.. code-block:: scala

  enablePlugins(DebianPlugin)

If you want to use the java based implementation, enable the following plugin.

.. code-block:: scala

  enablePlugins(JDebPackaging)

0.8 or lower
~~~~~~~~~~~~

For this versions debian packaging is automatically activated.
See the :doc:`Getting Started </gettingstarted>` page for informations
on how to enable sbt native packager.

If you want to enable `jdeb` packaging add the following to your `build.sbt`

.. code-block:: scala

    packageBin in Debian <<= debianJDebPackaging in Debian
    

Configurations
--------------

Settings and Tasks inherited from parent plugins can be scoped with ``Debian``.

.. code-block:: scala

  linuxPackageMappings in Debian := linuxPackageMappings.value


Settings
--------

Debian requires the following specific settings:

  ``name in Debian``
    The name of the package for debian (if different from general linux name).

  ``version in Debian``
    The debian-friendly version of the package.   Should be of the form ``x.y.z-build-aa``.

  ``debianPackageDependencies in Debian``
    The list of debian packages that this package depends on.

  ``debianPackageRecommends in Debian``
    The list of debian packages that are recommended to be installed with this package.

  ``linuxPackageMappings in Debian``
    Debian requires a ``/usr/share/doc/{package name}/changelog.gz`` file that describes
    the version changes in this package. These should be appended to the base linux versions.

  ``debianMaintainerScripts``
    These are the packaging scripts themselves used by ``dpkg-deb`` to build your debian.  These
    scripts are used when installing/uninstalling a debian, like prerm, postinstall, etc.  These scripts
    are placed in the ``DEBIAN`` file when building.    Some of these files can be autogenerated,
    for example when using a package archetype, like server_application.  Howeve, any autogenerated file
    can be overridden by placing your own files in the ``src/debian/DEBIAN`` directory.

  ``changelog in Debian``
    This is the changelog used by ``dpkg-genchanges`` to create the .changes file. This will allow you to
    upload the debian package to a mirror.


Tasks
-----

The Debian support grants the following commands:

  ``debian:package-bin``
    Generates the ``.deb`` package for this project.

  ``debian:lintian``
    Generates the ``.deb`` file and runs the ``lintian`` command to look for issues in the package.  Useful for debugging.

  ``debian:gen-changes``
    Generates the ``.changes``, and therefore the ``.deb`` package for this project.
    
    
Customize
---------------

This section contains example on how you can customize your debian build.

Customizing Debian Metadata
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Debian package provides metadata, which includes **dependencies** and **recommendations**.
A basic example to depend on java and recommend a git installation.

.. code-block:: scala

    debianPackageDependencies in Debian ++= Seq("java2-runtime", "bash (>= 2.05a-11)")

    debianPackageRecommends in Debian += "git"
    
To hook into the debian package lifecycle (https://wiki.debian.org/MaintainerScripts) you
can add ``preinst`` , ``postinst`` , ``prerm`` and/or ``postrm`` scripts. Just place them into
``src/debian/DEBIAN``.

If you use the ``packageArchetype.java_server`` there are predefined ``postinst`` and
``preinst`` files, which start/stop the application on install/remove calls. Existing
maintainer scripts will be extended not overridden.

Your control scripts are in a different castle.. directory? No problem.

.. code-block:: scala

    debianControlScriptsDirectory <<= (sourceDirectory) apply (_ / "deb" / "control")

